docs/en/docs/lakehouse/multi-catalog/iceberg.md, before:

---
{
    "title": "Iceberg",
    "language": "en"
}
---

<!-- 
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
distributed with this work for additional information
regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
"License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations
under the License.
-->


# Iceberg

## Usage

When connecting to Iceberg, Doris:

1. Supports Iceberg V1/V2 table formats;
2. Supports Position Delete but not Equality Delete for V2 format;

<version since="dev">

3. Supports Hive / Iceberg tables with data stored in GooseFS(GFS), which can be used the same way as normal Hive tables. Follow below steps to prepare doris environment：
    1. put goosefs-x.x.x-client.jar in fe/lib/ and apache_hdfs_broker/lib/
    2. add extra properties 'fs.AbstractFileSystem.gfs.impl' = 'com.qcloud.cos.goosefs.hadoop.GooseFileSystem'， 'fs.gfs.impl' = 'com.qcloud.cos.goosefs.hadoop.FileSystem' when creating catalog

</version>

## Create Catalog

### Hive Metastore Catalog

Same as creating Hive Catalogs. A simple example is provided here. See [Hive](./hive.md) for more information.

```sql
CREATE CATALOG iceberg PROPERTIES (
    'type'='hms',
    'hive.metastore.uris' = 'thrift://172.21.0.1:7004',
    'hadoop.username' = 'hive',
    'dfs.nameservices'='your-nameservice',
    'dfs.ha.namenodes.your-nameservice'='nn1,nn2',
    'dfs.namenode.rpc-address.your-nameservice.nn1'='172.21.0.2:4007',
    'dfs.namenode.rpc-address.your-nameservice.nn2'='172.21.0.3:4007',
    'dfs.client.failover.proxy.provider.your-nameservice'='org.apache.hadoop.hdfs.server.namenode.ha.ConfiguredFailoverProxyProvider'
);
```

### Iceberg Native Catalog

<version since="dev">

Access metadata with the iceberg API. The Hive, REST, Glue and other services can serve as the iceberg catalog.

</version>

#### Using Iceberg Hive Catalog

```sql
CREATE CATALOG iceberg PROPERTIES (
    'type'='iceberg',
    'iceberg.catalog.type'='hms',
    'hive.metastore.uris' = 'thrift://172.21.0.1:7004',
    'hadoop.username' = 'hive',
    'dfs.nameservices'='your-nameservice',
    'dfs.ha.namenodes.your-nameservice'='nn1,nn2',
    'dfs.namenode.rpc-address.your-nameservice.nn1'='172.21.0.2:4007',
    'dfs.namenode.rpc-address.your-nameservice.nn2'='172.21.0.3:4007',
    'dfs.client.failover.proxy.provider.your-nameservice'='org.apache.hadoop.hdfs.server.namenode.ha.ConfiguredFailoverProxyProvider'
);
```

#### Using Iceberg Glue Catalog

```sql
CREATE CATALOG glue PROPERTIES (
"type"="iceberg",
"iceberg.catalog.type" = "glue",
"glue.endpoint" = "https://glue.us-east-1.amazonaws.com",
"warehouse" = "s3://bucket/warehouse",
"AWS_ENDPOINT" = "s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com",
"AWS_REGION" = "us-east-1",
"AWS_ACCESS_KEY" = "ak",
"AWS_SECRET_KEY" = "sk",
"use_path_style" = "true"
);
```

`glue.endpoint`: Glue Endpoint. See [AWS Glue endpoints and quotas](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/general/latest/gr/glue.html).

`warehouse`: Glue Warehouse Location.  To determine the root path of the data warehouse in storage.

The other properties can refer to [Iceberg Glue Catalog](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/aws/#glue-catalog)

- Using Iceberg REST Catalog

RESTful service as the server side. Implementing RESTCatalog interface of iceberg to obtain metadata.

```sql
CREATE CATALOG iceberg PROPERTIES (
    'type'='iceberg',
    'iceberg.catalog.type'='rest',
    'uri' = 'http://172.21.0.1:8181',
);
```

If you want to use S3 storage, the following properties need to be set.

```
"AWS_ACCESS_KEY" = "ak"
"AWS_SECRET_KEY" = "sk"
"AWS_REGION" = "region-name"
"AWS_ENDPOINT" = "http://endpoint-uri"
"AWS_CREDENTIALS_PROVIDER" = "provider-class-name" // Optional. The default credentials class is based on BasicAWSCredentials.
```

## Column Type Mapping

Same as that in Hive Catalogs. See the relevant section in [Hive](./hive.md).

## Time Travel

<version since="1.2.2">

Doris supports reading the specified Snapshot of Iceberg tables.

</version>

Each write operation to an Iceberg table will generate a new Snapshot.

By default, a read request will only read the latest Snapshot.

You can read data of historical table versions using the  `FOR TIME AS OF`  or  `FOR VERSION AS OF`  statements based on the Snapshot ID or the timepoint the Snapshot is generated. For example:

`SELECT * FROM iceberg_tbl FOR TIME AS OF "2022-10-07 17:20:37";`

`SELECT * FROM iceberg_tbl FOR VERSION AS OF 868895038966572;`

You can use the [iceberg_meta](https://doris.apache.org/docs/dev/sql-manual/sql-functions/table-functions/iceberg_meta/) table function to view the Snapshot details of the specified table.

Commit message:

feat: support read iceberg data on gcs

docs/en/docs/lakehouse/multi-catalog/iceberg.md, after:

---
{
    "title": "Iceberg",
    "language": "en"
}
---

<!-- 
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
distributed with this work for additional information
regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
"License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations
under the License.
-->


# Iceberg

## Usage

When connecting to Iceberg, Doris:

1. Supports Iceberg V1/V2 table formats;
2. Supports Position Delete but not Equality Delete for V2 format;

<version since="dev">

3. Supports Hive / Iceberg tables with data stored in GooseFS(GFS), which can be used the same way as normal Hive tables. Follow below steps to prepare doris environment：
    1. put goosefs-x.x.x-client.jar in fe/lib/ and apache_hdfs_broker/lib/
    2. add extra properties 'fs.AbstractFileSystem.gfs.impl' = 'com.qcloud.cos.goosefs.hadoop.GooseFileSystem'， 'fs.gfs.impl' = 'com.qcloud.cos.goosefs.hadoop.FileSystem' when creating catalog

</version>

## Create Catalog

### Hive Metastore Catalog

Same as creating Hive Catalogs. A simple example is provided here. See [Hive](./hive.md) for more information.

```sql
CREATE CATALOG iceberg PROPERTIES (
    'type'='hms',
    'hive.metastore.uris' = 'thrift://172.21.0.1:7004',
    'hadoop.username' = 'hive',
    'dfs.nameservices'='your-nameservice',
    'dfs.ha.namenodes.your-nameservice'='nn1,nn2',
    'dfs.namenode.rpc-address.your-nameservice.nn1'='172.21.0.2:4007',
    'dfs.namenode.rpc-address.your-nameservice.nn2'='172.21.0.3:4007',
    'dfs.client.failover.proxy.provider.your-nameservice'='org.apache.hadoop.hdfs.server.namenode.ha.ConfiguredFailoverProxyProvider'
);
```

### Iceberg Native Catalog

<version since="dev">

Access metadata with the iceberg API. The Hive, REST, Glue and other services can serve as the iceberg catalog.

</version>

#### Using Iceberg Hive Catalog

```sql
CREATE CATALOG iceberg PROPERTIES (
    'type'='iceberg',
    'iceberg.catalog.type'='hms',
    'hive.metastore.uris' = 'thrift://172.21.0.1:7004',
    'hadoop.username' = 'hive',
    'dfs.nameservices'='your-nameservice',
    'dfs.ha.namenodes.your-nameservice'='nn1,nn2',
    'dfs.namenode.rpc-address.your-nameservice.nn1'='172.21.0.2:4007',
    'dfs.namenode.rpc-address.your-nameservice.nn2'='172.21.0.3:4007',
    'dfs.client.failover.proxy.provider.your-nameservice'='org.apache.hadoop.hdfs.server.namenode.ha.ConfiguredFailoverProxyProvider'
);
```

#### Using Iceberg Glue Catalog

```sql
CREATE CATALOG glue PROPERTIES (
"type"="iceberg",
"iceberg.catalog.type" = "glue",
"glue.endpoint" = "https://glue.us-east-1.amazonaws.com",
"warehouse" = "s3://bucket/warehouse",
"AWS_ENDPOINT" = "s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com",
"AWS_REGION" = "us-east-1",
"AWS_ACCESS_KEY" = "ak",
"AWS_SECRET_KEY" = "sk",
"use_path_style" = "true"
);
```

`glue.endpoint`: Glue Endpoint. See [AWS Glue endpoints and quotas](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/general/latest/gr/glue.html).

`warehouse`: Glue Warehouse Location.  To determine the root path of the data warehouse in storage.

The other properties can refer to [Iceberg Glue Catalog](https://iceberg.apache.org/docs/latest/aws/#glue-catalog)

- Using Iceberg REST Catalog

RESTful service as the server side. Implementing RESTCatalog interface of iceberg to obtain metadata.

```sql
CREATE CATALOG iceberg PROPERTIES (
    'type'='iceberg',
    'iceberg.catalog.type'='rest',
    'uri' = 'http://172.21.0.1:8181',
);
```

If you want to use S3 storage, the following properties need to be set.

```
"AWS_ACCESS_KEY" = "ak"
"AWS_SECRET_KEY" = "sk"
"AWS_REGION" = "region-name"
"AWS_ENDPOINT" = "http://endpoint-uri"
"AWS_CREDENTIALS_PROVIDER" = "provider-class-name" // Optional. The default credentials class is based on BasicAWSCredentials.
```

#### Google Dataproc Metastore 作为元数据服务

```sql
CREATE CATALOG glue PROPERTIES (
"type"="iceberg",
"warehouse" = "gs://bucket/warehouse",
"iceberg.catalog.type"="hms",
"hive.metastore.uris" = "thrift://172.21.0.1:9083",
"AWS_ENDPOINT" = "https://storage.googleapis.com",
"AWS_REGION" = "us-east-1",
"AWS_ACCESS_KEY" = "ak",
"AWS_SECRET_KEY" = "sk",
"use_path_style" = "true"
);
```

`hive.metastore.uris`: Dataproc Metastore URI，See in Metastore Services ：[Dataproc Metastore Services](https://console.cloud.google.com/dataproc/metastore).

`warehouse`:  Dataproc Metastore Location.  To determine the root path of the data warehouse in storage. Equal to the attribute `hive.metastore.warehouse.dir` in the Dataproc configuration。

The other properties can refer to [Dataproc Metastore Docs](https://cloud.google.com/dataproc-metastore/docs/hive-metastore)

## Column Type Mapping

Same as that in Hive Catalogs. See the relevant section in [Hive](./hive.md).

## Time Travel

<version since="1.2.2">

Doris supports reading the specified Snapshot of Iceberg tables.

</version>

Each write operation to an Iceberg table will generate a new Snapshot.

By default, a read request will only read the latest Snapshot.

You can read data of historical table versions using the  `FOR TIME AS OF`  or  `FOR VERSION AS OF`  statements based on the Snapshot ID or the timepoint the Snapshot is generated. For example:

`SELECT * FROM iceberg_tbl FOR TIME AS OF "2022-10-07 17:20:37";`

`SELECT * FROM iceberg_tbl FOR VERSION AS OF 868895038966572;`

You can use the [iceberg_meta](https://doris.apache.org/docs/dev/sql-manual/sql-functions/table-functions/iceberg_meta/) table function to view the Snapshot details of the specified table.
